
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# quincunx <img src='man/figures/logo.svg' align="right" height="139" />

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

The goal of quincunx is to provide programmatic access to the [Polygenic
Score (PGS) Catalog](https://www.pgscatalog.org/), an open resource for
[polygenic scores](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polygenic_score) and
associated metadata describing their development and respective
assessment.

Browse the online documentation at
[maialab.org/quincunx](https://maialab.org/quincunx) to get started.

## Installation

You can install the current version of quincunx with:

``` r
# install.packages("remotes")
remotes::install_github("maialab/quincunx")
```

## Cheatsheet

<a href="https://github.com/ramiromagno/cheatsheets/blob/master/quincunx/quincunx_cheatsheet.pdf"><img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ramiromagno/cheatsheets/master/quincunx/quincunx_cheatsheet.png" width="615" height="225"/></a>

## Citing this work

Our bioRxiv preprint:

-   Magno, R., Duarte, I., Maia, A.T. quincunx: an R package to query,
    download and wrangle PGS Catalog data. bioRxiv (2021). doi:
    [10.1101/2021.02.19.431997v1](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.02.19.431997v1).

Also, please do not forget to cite the authors behind the original
studies and the papers associated with the PGS Catalog project:

-   Lambert, S.A., Gil, L., Jupp, S. et al. The Polygenic Score Catalog
    as an open database for reproducibility and systematic evaluation.
    Nat Genet 53, 420–425 (2021). doi:
    [10.1038/s41588-021-00783-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-021-00783-5)
-   Wand, H., Lambert, S.A., Tamburro, C. et al. Improving reporting
    standards for polygenic scores in risk prediction studies. Nature
    591, 211–219 (2021). doi:
    [10.1038/s41586-021-03243-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03243-6)

## Terms of use

Please note that if you use the data provided by the PGS Catalog either
directly or via quincunx you agree to abide to the [EMBL-EBI Terms of
Use](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/about/terms-of-use/).

## Code of Conduct

Please note that the quincunx project is released with a [Contributor
Code of Conduct](https://maialab.org/quincunx/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.html). By
contributing to this project, you agree to abide by its terms.

## Acknowledgements

This work would have not been possible without the precious feedback
from the [PGS Catalog team](https://www.pgscatalog.org/), particularly
[Samuel Lambert](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/about/people/samuel-lambert) and
[Laurent Gil](https://www.sanger.ac.uk/person/gil-laurent/).

## Package name and hex sticker

The package name *quincunx* is another name for [Galton
Board](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bean_machine), that so nicely
exemplifies the [Central Limit
Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_limit_theorem), which in
turn is a key concept of genetics, namely, [Fisher’s infinitesimal
model](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tpb.2017.09.003)… which leads us to
Polygenic Scores, the key concept of the PGS Catalog.

The bird in the hex sticker is a *Porphyrio porphyrio*, an emblematic
species native to the Ria Formosa Natural Park, which is a wildlife
reserve surrounding the University of Algarve, where the authors are
affiliated.
